AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE
DESFire products
Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023 Application note
Document information
Information Content
Keywords MIFARE DESFire EV3, MIFARE DESFire EV2, MIFARE DESFire EV1, MIFARE, compatibility,
comparison
Abstract In this document several MIFARE DESFire products, MIFARE DESFire EV1, EV2, EV3 are
compared and their compatibility is analyzed. Their differences on command and feature level are
shown.
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
Revision history
Revision history
Rev Date Description
1.4 20230724 Modification of Table 4, added 16 kB memory type for MIFARE DESFire EV3, removed
32 kB planned type
1.3 20210611 Added a difference between MIFARE DESFire EV2 and EV3 in the handling of non-
present VCIIDs on the card in Section 7.1
1.2 20200930 DocStore document number of MIFARE DESFire EV3 data sheet corrected in Section 8
1.1 20200528 Renamed the descriptive title of the document and removed specific sections. Security
status changed to Company Public.
1.0 20200225 Initial version of the document
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
2 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
1 Introduction
MIFARE DESFire EV3 is the successor of MIFARE DESFire EV2, [2].
Additionally, MIFARE DESFire EV3 is the latest member of the MIFARE DESFire family. The MIFARE DESFire
family offers products which are based on a flexible, secure and scalable platform, offering continuous
innovation and the important aspects security as well as privacy. Extending the MIFARE DESFire EV2 which is
a very powerful, flexible and complex platform for dynamic multi-application use cases, the MIFARE DESFire
EV3 offers even more advanced hardware and software implementation on a brand new IC.
MIFARE DESFire EV3 is covering all well-known commands and features from MIFARE DESFire EV2, plus
adding some new features like Transaction Timer and Secure Dynamic Messaging on top [1].
In this document the detailed comparison of the products MIFARE DESFire EV3, MIFARE DESFire EV2 and
EV1 is presented and all different functionalities are outlined.
1.1 About the content of this document
This document addresses developers, project leaders and system integrators who have a general technical
understanding or are already familiar with the MIFARE DESFire product family. Knowledge of the reader
terminal infrastructure or complete service infrastructure is good to have.
Please note that this document does not cover the general working principle of the MIFARE DESFire EV3, but
only gives a high-level functional overview and comparison to the MIFARE DESFire EV2 product. Read Ref [1]
in order to get the full overview and description of MIFARE DESFire EV3 and the associated command set.
This application note is a supplementary document for implementations using the MIFARE DESFire EV3.
Should there be any confusion, please check the MIFARE DESFire EV3 data sheet Ref [1].
1.2 Structure of this document
This document describes the relevant information for being able to compare the products MIFARE DESFire
EV3, MIFARE DESFire EV1 / EV2, starting with an Introduction.
In Section 2.1, the key differences of the products will be outlined and supported commands are listed.
In the following Section 3, all key management relevant infos are discussed.
Section 4 highlights configuration settings of the IC.
Application management and application level functionality are discussed in Section 5.
Functionality related to file management is compared in Section 6.
The advanced and new features are finally discussed in Section 7.
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
3 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
2 Key differences
This section highlights the most important differences between MIFARE DESFire EV1, MIFARE DESFire EV2
and its successor MIFARE DESFire EV3. Starting with an overview of the feature differences and followed by
the differences of available and supported commands.
2.1 Key and feature differences
Table 1. Key Differences between MIFARE DESFire EV2, MIFARE DESFire EV3
Item MIFARE DESFire EV2 MIFARE DESFire EV3
Application deletion using the DAMMAC Not Supported New Feature
See Section 4.4.2
Secure Dynamic Messaging and
Mirroring
Not Supported New Feature
See Section 7.5
Transaction Timer Not Supported New Feature
See Section 7.4
2.2 Supported commands
Table 2. Supported Commands for MIFARE DESFire EV1, MIFARE DESFire EV2 and MIFARE DESFire EV3
Command Name Command Code MIFARE DESFire EV1 MIFARE DESFire EV2 MIFARE DESFire EV3
Authenticate 0x0A Yes Yes Yes
AuthenticateISO 0x1A Yes Yes Yes
AuthenticateAES 0xAA Yes Yes Yes
AuthenticateEV2First 0x71 No Yes Yes
AuthenticateEV2Non
First
0x77 No Yes Yes
FreeMem 0x6E Yes Yes Yes
Format 0xFC Yes Yes Yes
SetConfiguration 0x5C Yes Yes Yes but differences
GetVersion 0x60 Yes Yes Yes
GetCardUID 0x51 Yes Yes Yes but differences
ChangeKey 0xC4 Yes Yes Yes
ChangeKeyEV2 0xC6 No Yes Yes
InitializeKeySet 0x56 No Yes Yes
FinalizeKeySet 0x57 No Yes Yes
RollKeySet 0x55 No Yes Yes
GetKeySettings 0x45 Yes Yes Yes
ChangeKeySettings 0x54 Yes Yes Yes
GetKeyVersion 0x64 Yes Yes Yes
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
4 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
Table 2. Supported Commands for MIFARE DESFire EV1, MIFARE DESFire EV2 and MIFARE DESFire EV3...continued
Command Name Command Code MIFARE DESFire EV1 MIFARE DESFire EV2 MIFARE DESFire EV3
CreateApplication 0xCA Yes Yes Yes but differences in
KeySett3 parameter
DeleteApplication 0xDA Yes Yes Yes but differences
in how a delegated
application can be
deleted
CreateDelegated
Application
0xC9 No Yes Yes but differences in
KeySett3 parameter
SelectApplication 0x5A Yes Yes Yes
GetApplicationIDs 0x6A Yes Yes Yes
GetDFNames 0x6D No Yes Yes
GetDelegatedInfo 0x69 No Yes Yes
CreateStdDataFile 0xCD Yes Yes Yes but differences in
FileOption
CreateBackupDataFile 0xCB Yes Yes Yes but differences in
FileOption
CreateValueFile 0xCC Yes Yes Yes but differences in
FileOption
CreateLinearRecord
File
0xC1 Yes Yes Yes
CreateCyclicRecord
File
0xC0 Yes Yes Yes
CreateTransaction
MACFile
0xCE No Yes Yes
DeleteFile 0xDF Yes Yes Yes
GetFileIDs 0x6F Yes Yes Yes
GetISOFileIDs 0x61 Yes Yes Yes
GetFileSettings 0xF5 Yes Yes Yes but differences in
response for Standard,
Backup and Value File
GetFileCounters 0xF6 Yes No Yes, new command
ChangeFileSettings 0x5F Yes Yes Yes, but differences
in FileOption and new
additional parameters
ReadData 0xBD / 0xAD Yes Yes Yes
WriteData 0x3D / 0x8D Yes Yes Yes
GetValue 0x6C Yes Yes Yes
Credit 0x0C Yes Yes Yes
Debit 0xDC Yes Yes Yes
LimitedCredit 0x1C Yes Yes Yes
ReadRecords 0xBB / 0xAB Yes Yes Yes
WriteRecord 0x3B / 0x8B Yes Yes Yes
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
5 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
Table 2. Supported Commands for MIFARE DESFire EV1, MIFARE DESFire EV2 and MIFARE DESFire EV3...continued
Command Name Command Code MIFARE DESFire EV1 MIFARE DESFire EV2 MIFARE DESFire EV3
UpdateRecord 0xDB / 0xBA Yes Yes Yes
ClearRecordFile 0xEB Yes Yes Yes
CommitTransaction 0xC7 Yes Yes Yes
AbortTransaction 0xA7 Yes Yes Yes
CommitReaderID 0xC8 No Yes Yes
ISOSelectFile 0xA4 Yes Yes Yes
ISOReadBinary 0xB0 Yes Yes Yes
ISOUpdateBinary 0xD6 Yes Yes Yes
ISOReadRecord 0xB2 Yes Yes Yes
ISOAppendRecord 0xE2 Yes Yes Yes
ISOGetChallenge 0x84 Yes Yes Yes
ISOExternal
Authenticate
0x82 Yes Yes Yes
ISOInternal
Authenticate
0x88 Yes Yes Yes
ISOSelectFile (VC) 0xA4 No Yes Yes
ISOExternal
Authenticate (VC)
0x82 No Yes Yes
PreparePC 0xF0 No Yes Yes but new response
parameters depending
on the Option byte
ProximityCheck 0xF2 No Yes Yes
VerifyPC 0xFD No Yes Yes
Read_Sig 0x3C Yes Yes
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
6 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
3 Keys and key management
This chapter compares the differences in the available keys and key management scenarios between MIFARE
DESFire EV2 and MIFARE DESFire EV3.
3.1 PICC keys
Table 3. PICC Keys
Key Key
Number
MIFARE
DESFire EV1
MIFARE
DESFire EV2
MIFARE
DESFire EV3
Comment
PICC Master Key 0x00 Supported Supported Supported Similar functionality
Originality Keys 0x01,
0x02,
0x03,
0x04
NOT
Supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
Keys for the Originality Check feature,
written into the IC during manufacturing
DAM Keys 0x10,
0x11,
0x12
NOT
Supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
Keys for the delegated application
management
NXP DAM Keys 0x18,
0x19,
0x1A
NOT
Supported
NOT
Supported
Supported Keys for the delegated application
management by NXP, through the App
Xplorer with NXP as card issuer
VC and PC Keys 0x20,
0x21,
0x22,
0x23
NOT
Supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
Keys for the virtual card and proximity
check features
Application Default
Key
- Supported Supported Supported Same functionality
Default key value with which all application
keys are initialized, once a new application
is created on PICC level.
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
7 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
3.2 Application keys
The application key set concept is the same in MIFARE DESFire EV3 as it is already well-known from MIFARE
DESFire EV2.
One application on MIFARE DESFire EV3 can have up to 16 keysets, with each keyset holding up to 14 keys.
The number of keysets and keys per keyset can be defined during application creation. At a time, only one
keyset is active. There is a process defined to role from one to the other keyset dynamically. On MIFARE
DESFire EV1 only one keyset is available, not multiple ones.
Multiple application keysets are available for standard applications, created with the CreateApplication
command, and also available for delegated applications, created with the CreateDelegatedApplication
command.
The default key value for applications keys is taken from the Application Default Key which is available on
PICC level. This default key value is used for initializing all application keys with the same value, once a new
application is created with the CreateApplication command.
When creating a new delegated application with the CreateDelegatedApplication command, the default key
value for the applications keys is defined directly in the command, but not coming from the Application Default
Key from PICC level.
Keyset rolling can be used inside an application on MIFARE DESFire EV2 and MIFARE DESFire EV3 in the
same way. Keyset rolling is needed for switching from one currently used keyset, to another keyset in a very fast
and secure way. This keyset rolling can be done securely in the field, if the keyset personalization process has
been completed during the application personalization process.
Keyset rolling was not available on MIFARE DESFire EV1.
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
8 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
4 Configuration and settings on PICC level
4.1 PICC level memory size
The non-volatile flash-based memory, that is available for user data, is allocated in a page size of 256 bytes
on MIFARE DESFire EV3. The complete user memory is available for application and file creation (including
overhead). All PICC level keys and configuration data are located outside the user memory.
Table 4. Available user memory on different MIFARE DESFire versions
Product type MIFARE DESFire EV1 MIFARE DESFire EV2 MIFARE DESFire EV3
2 kB 2304 bytes 2560 bytes 2560 bytes
4 kB 4864 bytes 5120 bytes 5120 bytes
8 kB 7936 bytes 8192 bytes 8192 bytes
16 kB - 16384 bytes 16384 bytes
4.2 Configuration settings on PICC level
MIFARE DESFire EV3 offers the SetConfiguration command for configuring features on PICC as well as on
Application level. Most options of this command are the same as already known from MIFARE DESFire EV2,
but some more functionality was added additionally.
Table 5. SetConfiguration command options
Option Bit Index and Meaning MIFARE
DESFire
EV1
MIFARE
DESFire
EV2
MIFARE
DESFire
EV3
Description
0x00
Bit 6 - 4-byte NUID configuration Not
supported
Not
supported
Supported Setting a 4-byte NUID for
the PICC.
Bit 5 - Random ID configuration Not
supported
Not
supported
Supported Configuring the format
of the Random ID (ISO
compliant or legacy
Random ID format).
Bit 4 - Error code binding Not
supported
Not
supported
Supported
Bit 3 - AuthVCMandatory Not
supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
Bit 2 - PCMandatory Not
supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
Bit 1 - Random ID enablement Supported Supported Supported Same functionality
Bit 0 - Format disabling Supported Supported Supported Same functionality
0x01 Updating the PICCAppDefaultKey Supported Supported Supported Same functionality
0x02 Setting a user-defined ATS Supported Supported Supported Same functionality
0x03 Setting a user-defined SAK Not
supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
0x04 Secure Messaging configuration Not
supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
9 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
Table 5. SetConfiguration command options...continued
Option Bit Index and Meaning MIFARE
DESFire
EV1
MIFARE
DESFire
EV2
MIFARE
DESFire
EV3
Description
0x05
71...64 - VCTID Override Not
supported
Not
supported
Supported VC Type Identifier
Override
55...48 - PDCap 1.2 Not
supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
39...32 - PDCap 2.2 Not
supported
Not
supported
Supported Chip manufacturer
defined PDCap2.2:
TransactionTimer
enablement and
configuration (to limit the
time of one transaction).
15...8 - PDCap 2.5 Not
supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
7...0 - PDCap 2.6 Not
supported
Supported Supported Same functionality
0x06 VCIID configuration Not
supported
Supported Supported VCIID reconfiguration
Changing the default ISO
DF Name for MIFARE
DESFire to a customized
one.
0x0C ATQA configuration Not
supported
Not
Supported
Supported User ATQA
Defining a customized
ATQA value.
4.3 Retrieving the Card UID
The GetCardUID command which is already well-known from MIFARE DESFire EV1 and EV2 is existing in the
same way also on MIFARE DESFire EV3.
4.4 Application management
4.4.1 Application creation
On MIFARE DESFire EV3, two ways for application creation are existing - the CreateApplication command
for creating a standard application by the card owner, or CreateDelegatedApplication command for creating a
delegated application by a third party application provider.
The two mentioned commands have the same purpose and functionality as they already had on MIFARE
DESFire EV2. But on MIFARE DESFire EV3 some minor functional add-ons were included in the command
parameters.
One parameter of the commands, which was extended is the parameter KeySett3:
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
10 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
Table 6. KeySett3 parameter of CreateApplication and CreateDelegatedApplication command
Parameter Bit Index and
Meaning
MIFARE DESFire
EV2
MIFARE DESFire
EV3
Description
KeySett3
4 - Application deletion
with Application
MasterKey
NOT supported Supported Application deletion with the Application
MasterKey can be always enabled,
independent of the PICCKeySettings.
2 - Application-specific
capability data
Supported Supported Enabling / disabling capability data.
1 - Application-specific
VC keys
Supported Supported Enabling / disabling VC keys.
0 - Application keysets Supported Supported Enabling / disabling multiple application
keysets.
On MIFARE DESFire EV1 in contrast, only the CreateApplication command was available.
4.4.2 Application deletion
The application deletion functionality on MIFARE DESFire EV3 was extended, with one more possible way of
deletion. Option 1 and 2 were already well-known and Option 3 was added for an easier deletion of delegated
applications:
1. 2. 3. On PICC Level: Application deletion after authentication with PICCMasterKey
On Application Level: Application deletion (standard and delegated application) after authentication with
ApplicationMasterKey
On PICC Level: Delegated application deletion after authentication with PICCDAMAuthKey
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
11 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
5 Application level functionality
5.1 Application configuration
On application level, MIFARE DESFire EV3 offers the same configuration options and settings as were already
available on MIFARE DESFire EV2. Some new options have been added additionally, which can be seen in the
options of the SetConfiguration command, in Section 4.
5.2 File types and their configurability
MIFARE DESFire EV3 offers the six already well-known file types which were already available on MIFARE
DESFire EV2.
The file access rights and, also the possibility of having multiple file access right sets per file, remain in the
same already known way.
As new available feature, one of the available file types support the so-called Secure Dynamic Messaging and
Mirroring on MIFARE DESFire EV3:
• Standard Data File
For enabling the mentioned feature, the FileOption parameter of the file creation command needs to be set
accordingly:
Table 7. FileOption parameter of CreateStandardDataFile command
Parameter Bit Index and
Meaning
MIFARE DESFire
EV1
MIFARE DESFire
EV2
MIFARE DESFire
EV3
Description
FileOption
7 - Additional
Access Rights
NOT Supported Supported Supported Enabling additional
access right sets
for this file.
6 - Secure
Dynamic
Messaging &
Mirroring
NOT Supported NOT Supported Supported for
• Standard Data
File
Enabling the SDM
functionality.
1...0 -
Communication
Mode
Supported Supported Supported Set the
communication
mode for this file
(Plain, MACed,
Fully Encrypted).
5.2.1 File settings and options
The file settings are chosen during the creation of the file, as outlined in Section 5.2.
For again retrieving the file settings from the IC, the GetFileSettings command is available.
The GetFileSettings command returns the already known settings in the same way as it was already done for
MIFARE DESFire EV2 for these file types:
• Linear Record File
• Cyclic Record File
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
12 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
• Transaction MAC File
For the Standard Data File, which additionally supports the Secure Dynamic Messaging (SDM) feature on
MIFARE DESFire EV3, all SDM relevant parameters and settings are returned.
The SDM parameters are listed in Table 8.
Table 8. SDM Options of the GetFileSettings command for the Standard Data File
SDM Options Description
SDM Options Bit settings for indicating whether SDM-specific options like the VCUID mirroring,
SDMReadCtr, SDMReadCtrLimit, SDMEncFileData are enabled or disabled.
SDM Access Rights Access rights for the SDM-specific data and the mirrored data (Meta Data Read
access and SDM File Read access).
VCUID Offset Mirror position for the VCUID (LSB first).
SDM Read Ctr Offset Mirror position for the SDM Read Counter (LSB first).
PICC Data Offset Mirror position for encrypted PICC Data (LSB first).
SDM MAC Input Offset Offset in the file where the SDM MAC computation starts (LSB first)
SDM ENC Offset Mirror position for the SDM ENC (LSB first).
SDM ENC Length Length of the SDM ENC File Data (LSB first).
SDM MAC Offset Mirror position for the SDM MAC.
SDM Read Ctr Limit The limit of the SDMReadCtr. Limiting the number of reads that can be done with
a single device applying Secure Dynamic Messaging. Main use case is to limit the
number of usage from the card side.
For retrieving file counters from Standard Data Files on MIFARE DESFire EV3 that are related to the Secure
Dynamic Messaging, the command GetFileCounters is available for execution.
This command returns the SDMReadCtr (LSB first) of the targeted file.
For changing all available file options and settings, the dedicated ChangeFileSettings command can be used.
Using this well-known command from MIFARE DESFire EV1 and EV2, all possible file settings can be changed.
The available settings that can be modified are different between all available file types. For MIFARE DESFire
EV3 the command is fully backward compatible and has been extended with the optional settings for configuring
new IC features.
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
13 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
6 File level functionality
All file level commands which are intended to execute data manipulation, are already well-known from the older
MIFARE DESFire versions. On MIFARE DESFire EV3, the same commands can be utilized.
For data exchange, MIFARE DESFire EV3 supports a frame size of up to 256 bytes. The default frame size
equals 64 bytes, but can be extended or reduced by using the SetConfiguration command and modifying the
relevant T0 byte inside the ATS.
MIFARE DESFire EV3 also supports two different chaining modes: ISO/IEC 14443-4 chaining or native chaining
(using 0xAF).
6.1 File access rights
As already well-known from MIFARE DESFire EV1 and EV2, the file access rights management is implemented
in the same way for MIFARE DESFire EV3.
Every file can be associated with 4 basic access rights:
• Read
• Write
• ReadWrite
• ChangeConfiguration
These 4 access rights form one so called access condition set. Every file can be optionally equipped with up
to 8 access condition sets. Each set is containing three access conditions: one for each of Read, Write and
ReadWrite. The first set is called the mandatory set as it needs to be always present for every file and is already
defined during file creation. The ChangeConfiguration access right is only available in the first, mandatory
access condition set as it can only be available once for each file.
File Access Rights for Secure Dynamic Messaging
For MIFARE DESFire EV3 the described access rights and access condition sets are existing in the same way.
But they have been extended with access conditions reflecting the access rights that are needed for Secure
Dynamic Messaging (SDM).
Once SDM is enabled for a Standard Data File, additionally 3 access rights can be defined:
• SDM Meta Read
• SDM File Read
• SDM Counter Retrieval
The SDM-related access rights can only be set, if SDM was enabled for the Standard Data File during file
creation, and if SDM is activated for the file. For all three mentioned access rights, an available application key
number or the FREE (0xE) or NEVER (0xF) access right can be set.
The purpose / functionality of the three mentioned access rights is the following:
• SDM Meta Read - Encryption of the PICCData (metadata) using the specified application key number
• SDM File Read - Encryption of the mirrored file data using the specified application key number
• SDM Counter Retrieval - Possibility to retrieve the associated SDMReadCtr using the GetFileCounters
command after an authentication with the specified application key number
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
14 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
7 Advanced and new features
All advanced and new features that are highlighted in this chapter are valid for the MIFARE DESFire EV3
product.
7.1 Virtual card
The virtual card feature and concept is unchanged in MIFARE DESFire EV3 and works in the same way as it is
already known from MIFARE DESFire EV2.
There is only one difference in the handling of ISOSelect responses if the targeted VCIID is not present on the
card.
Table 9. Difference in ISOSelect response
MIFARE DESFire EV2 MIFARE DESFire EV3
If the targeted IID is not supported, always the FCI template
holding random data + 9000 is returned
If the targeted IID is not supported, it depends on whether
the card is holding any VC configured for AuthVCMandatory.
If yes, the FCI template holding random data + 9000 is
returned.
If no, the error code 6A82 is returned. (see Table 30. in [1])
Please refer to [1] for MIFARE DESFire EV3 virtual card architecture details.
7.2 Proximity check
The proximity check feature and concept is unchanged in MIFARE DESFire EV3 and works in the same way as
it is already known from MIFARE DESFire EV2.
Please refer to [1] for MIFARE DESFire EV3 proximity check details.
As small extension to the existing three proximity check related commands, they have been extended with an
optional parameter.
The three proximity check commands are:
• PreparePC
• ProximityCheck
• VerifyPC
The optional parameter actBitRate (activated bit rate) can be included as response parameter of the PreparePC
command, which also means that the VerifyPC command needs to take this into consideration. However, this
is only optional and there is no strong need to include the actBitRate, which guarantees complete backward
compatibility of the proximity check protocol.
7.3 Originality check
The originality check feature and concept is unchanged in MIFARE DESFire EV3 and works in the same way as
it is already known from MIFARE DESFire EV2.
There are two originality check procedures available on MIFARE DESFire EV3:
• Symmetric originality check concept using AES
• Asymmetric originality check concept based on signature checking and ECC
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
15 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
Please refer to [1] for MIFARE DESFire EV3 originality check details.
7.4 Transaction timer
The transaction timer is a new feature of MIFARE DESFire EV3 which was not existing on any of the prior
MIFARE DESFire products.
To mitigate attacks where a Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) attacker would delay execution of the CommitTransaction
command or a final write command to complete a transaction on the card, by keeping the card powered until,
for example, he is being controlled by a control agent during public transport, MIFARE DESFire EV3 supports a
transaction timer feature.
This feature allows the card issuer to configure a maximum time a transaction can take. Once the threshold is
exceeded, the card will automatically reset.
The transaction timer is by default turned off, and can be configured and activated by using the command
SetConfiguration with Option 0x05, to configure the PDCap2.2.
Once enabled, the timer shall be activated on any subsequent transaction start via application selection with
Cmd.SelectApplication or Cmd.ISOSelect / Cmd.ISOSelectFile.
If the timer expires, the card will be reset similar as with full power-off reset, i.e. moving the card into ISO/IEC
14443-3 IDLE state.
As long as the timer has not expired, regular command execution is not influenced by the feature.
Once enabled, the transaction timer value shall be reflected via the PDCap2.2 as returned on a
Cmd.AuthenticateEV2First.
Please refer to [1] for MIFARE DESFire EV3 transaction timer details.
7.5 Secure dynamic messaging
Secure dynamic messaging is a new feature that was introduced with MIFARE DESFire EV3. The Secure
Dynamic Messaging (SDM) allows for confidential and integrity protected data exchange, without requiring a
preceding authentication.
MIFARE DESFire EV3 supports SDM for reading from one or more Standard Data Files on the PICC. Secure
Dynamic Messaging allows adding security to the data read, while still being able to access it with standard
NDEF readers for NTAG Type 4 cards. The typical use case is an NDEF holding a URI and some meta-data,
where SDM allows this meta-data to be communicated confidentiality and integrity protected toward a backend
server.
Please refer to [1] for MIFARE DESFire EV3 secure dynamic messaging details.
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
16 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
8 References
[1] [2] Product data sheet - MIFARE DESFire EV3 contactless multi-application IC, document number DS4870xx,
available in https://www.nxp.com/mynxp/secure-files
Product data sheet - MIFARE DESFire EV2 contactless multi-application IC, document number DS2260xx,
available in https://www.nxp.com/mynxp/secure-files
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
17 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
9 Legal information
9.1 Definitions
Draft — A draft status on a document indicates that the content is still
under internal review and subject to formal approval, which may result
in modifications or additions. NXP Semiconductors does not give any
representations or warranties as to the accuracy or completeness of
information included in a draft version of a document and shall have no
liability for the consequences of use of such information.
9.2 Disclaimers
Limited warranty and liability — Information in this document is believed
to be accurate and reliable. However, NXP Semiconductors does not give
any representations or warranties, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy
or completeness of such information and shall have no liability for the
consequences of use of such information. NXP Semiconductors takes no
responsibility for the content in this document if provided by an information
source outside of NXP Semiconductors.
In no event shall NXP Semiconductors be liable for any indirect, incidental,
punitive, special or consequential damages (including - without limitation -
lost profits, lost savings, business interruption, costs related to the removal
or replacement of any products or rework charges) whether or not such
damages are based on tort (including negligence), warranty, breach of
contract or any other legal theory.
Notwithstanding any damages that customer might incur for any reason
whatsoever, NXP Semiconductors’ aggregate and cumulative liability
towards customer for the products described herein shall be limited in
accordance with the Terms and conditions of commercial sale of NXP
Semiconductors.
Right to make changes — NXP Semiconductors reserves the right to
make changes to information published in this document, including without
limitation specifications and product descriptions, at any time and without
notice. This document supersedes and replaces all information supplied prior
to the publication hereof.
Suitability for use — NXP Semiconductors products are not designed,
authorized or warranted to be suitable for use in life support, life-critical or
safety-critical systems or equipment, nor in applications where failure or
malfunction of an NXP Semiconductors product can reasonably be expected
to result in personal injury, death or severe property or environmental
damage. NXP Semiconductors and its suppliers accept no liability for
inclusion and/or use of NXP Semiconductors products in such equipment or
applications and therefore such inclusion and/or use is at the customer’s own
risk.
Applications — Applications that are described herein for any of these
products are for illustrative purposes only. NXP Semiconductors makes no
representation or warranty that such applications will be suitable for the
specified use without further testing or modification.
Customers are responsible for the design and operation of their
applications and products using NXP Semiconductors products, and NXP
Semiconductors accepts no liability for any assistance with applications or
customer product design. It is customer’s sole responsibility to determine
whether the NXP Semiconductors product is suitable and fit for the
customer’s applications and products planned, as well as for the planned
application and use of customer’s third party customer(s). Customers should
provide appropriate design and operating safeguards to minimize the risks
associated with their applications and products.
NXP Semiconductors does not accept any liability related to any default,
damage, costs or problem which is based on any weakness or default
in the customer’s applications or products, or the application or use by
customer’s third party customer(s). Customer is responsible for doing all
necessary testing for the customer’s applications and products using NXP
Semiconductors products in order to avoid a default of the applications
and the products or of the application or use by customer’s third party
customer(s). NXP does not accept any liability in this respect.
Export control — This document as well as the item(s) described herein
may be subject to export control regulations. Export might require a prior
authorization from competent authorities.
Evaluation products — This product is provided on an “as is” and “with all
faults” basis for evaluation purposes only. NXP Semiconductors, its affiliates
and their suppliers expressly disclaim all warranties, whether express,
implied or statutory, including but not limited to the implied warranties of non-
infringement, merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose. The entire
risk as to the quality, or arising out of the use or performance, of this product
remains with customer.
In no event shall NXP Semiconductors, its affiliates or their suppliers
be liable to customer for any special, indirect, consequential, punitive
or incidental damages (including without limitation damages for loss of
business, business interruption, loss of use, loss of data or information, and
the like) arising out the use of or inability to use the product, whether or not
based on tort (including negligence), strict liability, breach of contract, breach
of warranty or any other theory, even if advised of the possibility of such
damages.
Notwithstanding any damages that customer might incur for any reason
whatsoever (including without limitation, all damages referenced above and
all direct or general damages), the entire liability of NXP Semiconductors,
its affiliates and their suppliers and customer’s exclusive remedy for all of
the foregoing shall be limited to actual damages incurred by customer based
on reasonable reliance up to the greater of the amount actually paid by
customer for the product or five dollars (US$5.00). The foregoing limitations,
exclusions and disclaimers shall apply to the maximum extent permitted by
applicable law, even if any remedy fails of its essential purpose.
Translations — A non-English (translated) version of a document, including
the legal information in that document, is for reference only. The English
version shall prevail in case of any discrepancy between the translated and
English versions.
Security — Customer understands that all NXP products may be subject to
unidentified vulnerabilities or may support established security standards or
specifications with known limitations. Customer is responsible for the design
and operation of its applications and products throughout their lifecycles
to reduce the effect of these vulnerabilities on customer’s applications
and products. Customer’s responsibility also extends to other open and/or
proprietary technologies supported by NXP products for use in customer’s
applications. NXP accepts no liability for any vulnerability. Customer should
regularly check security updates from NXP and follow up appropriately.
Customer shall select products with security features that best meet rules,
regulations, and standards of the intended application and make the
ultimate design decisions regarding its products and is solely responsible
for compliance with all legal, regulatory, and security related requirements
concerning its products, regardless of any information or support that may be
provided by NXP.
NXP has a Product Security Incident Response Team (PSIRT) (reachable
at PSIRT@nxp.com) that manages the investigation, reporting, and solution
release to security vulnerabilities of NXP products.
NXP B.V. - NXP B.V. is not an operating company and it does not distribute
or sell products.
9.3 Trademarks
Notice: All referenced brands, product names, service names, and
trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
NXP — wordmark and logo are trademarks of NXP B.V.
DESFire — is a trademark of NXP B.V.
MIFARE — is a trademark of NXP B.V.
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
18 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
Tables
Tab. 1. Key Differences between MIFARE DESFire
EV2, MIFARE DESFire EV3 ..............................4
Tab. 2. Supported Commands for MIFARE
DESFire EV1, MIFARE DESFire EV2 and
MIFARE DESFire EV3 ...................................... 4
Tab. 3. PICC Keys .........................................................7
Tab. 4. Available user memory on different
MIFARE DESFire versions ................................9
Tab. 5. Tab. 6. SetConfiguration command options .................. 9
KeySett3 parameter of CreateApplication
and CreateDelegatedApplication command .... 11
Tab. 7. FileOption parameter of
CreateStandardDataFile command ................. 12
Tab. 8. SDM Options of the GetFileSettings
command for the Standard Data File .............. 13
Tab. 9. Difference in ISOSelect response ................... 15
AN12752 All information provided in this document is subject to legal disclaimers. © 2023 NXP B.V. All rights reserved.
Application note Rev. 1.4 — 24 July 2023
19 / 20
NXP Semiconductors AN12752
MIFARE DESFire EV3 feature and functionality comparison to other MIFARE DESFire products
Contents
1 Introduction ......................................................... 3
1.1 About the content of this document ...................3
1.2 Structure of this document ................................ 3
2 Key differences ................................................... 4
2.1 Key and feature differences ...............................4
2.2 Supported commands ........................................4
3 Keys and key management ................................7
3.1 PICC keys ..........................................................7
3.2 Application keys .................................................8
4 Configuration and settings on PICC level .........9
4.1 PICC level memory size ....................................9
4.2 Configuration settings on PICC level .................9
4.3 Retrieving the Card UID .................................. 10
4.4 Application management ................................. 10
4.4.1 Application creation ......................................... 10
4.4.2 Application deletion ..........................................11
5 Application level functionality ......................... 12
5.1 Application configuration ..................................12
5.2 File types and their configurability ................... 12
5.2.1 File settings and options ..................................12
6 File level functionality ...................................... 14
6.1 File access rights .............................................14
7 Advanced and new features ............................ 15
7.1 Virtual card ...................................................... 15
7.2 Proximity check ............................................... 15
7.3 Originality check .............................................. 15
7.4 Transaction timer ............................................. 16
7.5 Secure dynamic messaging .............................16
8 References .........................................................17
9 Legal information ..............................................18
Please be aware that important notices concerning this document and the product(s)
described herein, have been included in section 'Legal information'.
© 2023 NXP B.V. For more information, please visit: http://www.nxp.com
All rights reserved.
Date of release: 24 July 2023
Document identifier: AN12752
